== sangeet ==

Sangeet is the elegant art which allows us to express ourselves via rhythm and harmony. The term doesn't really translate into English. In its most general sense it is considered synonymous with the term "music"; however it is actually a threefold artform of vocal music, instrumental music, and dance. Since classical dance is also a component, it is not strictly synonymous to the Western term "music".
There is a historical reason why sangeet is composed of these three artforms. In the Vedic and post Vedic period it was customary to perform mythological dramas. These dramas used dancers to mime the story, instrumentalists to play the musical accompaniment, and vocalists to tell and sing the story.
There is a standard terminology whenever one wishes to be specific. Dance is refered to as "nritya", vocal is refered to as "gayaki", and instrumental is known as "vadhya sangeet".

In Indian classical music, there are two major systems of music - Uttari or Hindustani, prevailing in the northern parts of India, and Dakshini or Carnatic, prevailing in the south.

As in every art form, there are two sides to sangeet - theory and practice.

== dhvani ==

Everything we hear is dhvani, or a sound note, be it a vocalist singing, the wails of a crying baby on an airplane or the random hostel-wide screaming contests that keep happening periodically. Some dhvanis are peaceful to hear, which sangeet deals with. Those sweet notes are called Naad.

== aandolan ==

When you pluck the stretched strings of a Sarod, Sitar or a Tanpura, the to and fro, back and forth motion of the strings is called Aandolan or Kampan, or simply vibrations. It is because of these aandolans that dhvani is generated.

== naad ==

Sweet dhvanis created by proper, stable vibrations are called Naad. In other words, dhvanis that are fit to be used in sangeet are called Naad. There are three characteristics of Naad:
Loudness and softness
Index position
Group and quality

== svara ==

Swar are nothing more than the seven notes of the Indian musical scale.  Swar is also called "sur".  At a fundamental level they are similar to the solfa of Western music.  These are shown in the table below.  Two of these swar are noteworthy in that they are immutably fixed.  These two notes are shadj (Sa) and pancham (Pa) and are referred to as "achala swar".  These two swar form the tonal foundation for all the Indian classical music.  The other notes have alternate forms and are called "chala swar".

abbreviated name is most commonly used (sargam)

== saptak ==

The swar (notes) are assembled to make the scales.  These scales are called "saptak".

Sequence of the 7 shuddh svaras. Agitation level increases as we progress along the sequence.
For example, agitation of Pancham is 3/2 times that of Shadaj. So if we consider Sa to be at 440 Hz, Pa would be at 660 Hz.
After Ni, Shadaj of the next octave is encountered.
Mandra, madhya, taar

== thaat ==

The that (thaat) is the specification as to which of the alternate forms of swar will be chosen.  It has been pointed out elsewhere that several of the swar have alternate forms.  The permutations of the various forms give rise to numerous scales with vastly differing intervals.  Therefore the concept of that is essentially the same as the Western concept of a mode.

vekahmukhi 72 raga, bhatkhande 32 raga, commonly 10, ahir bhairav etc

== raga ==

The rag is the most important concept that any student of Indian music should understand.  The Hindi/Urdu word "rag" is derived from the Sanskrit "raga" which means "colour, or passion" (Apte 1987).  It is linked to the Sanskrit word "ranj" which means "to colour" (Apte 1987).  Therefore rag may be thought of as an acoustic method of colouring the mind of the listener with an emotion.  This is fine as a general concept but what is it musically?  It is not a tune, melody, scale, mode, or any concept for which an English word exists.  It is instead a combination of different characteristics.  It is these characteristics which define the rag.